Sampling Design


In the context of spatial sampling problems, where populations of
mobile animals are sampled by an array of traps (or other sampling
devices), there are a number of critical design elements. Two of the
most important ones are the spacing and configuration of traps within
the array. In this chapter we recommend a general framework for
evaluating design choices for SCR studies, such as trap spacing, using
Monte Carlo simulation of specific design scenarios -- what we call
scenario analysis.  We evaluate trade-offs between trap spacing and
the total area covered by traps (considerations that are related to
available funding and logistics ), including designs based on regular,
clustered and rotating traps, and show that SCR models are flexible
and perform well under a range of sptial design scenarios.  While we
recommend scenario analysis as a general tool to understand your
expected data before carrying out a spatial capture-recapture study,
it is possible to develop some heuristics and even analytic results
related to the broader problem of model-based spatial design using an
explicit objective function based on the inference objective.  We
outline an approach where we identify a variance criterion, namely,
the variance of an estimator of N for the prescribed state-space. An
ideal spatial design should minimize this variance. We show that this
depends on the configuration of trap locations, and we provide a
framework for optimizing the variance criterion over the design space
(the collection of all possible designs of a given size).



Keywords: 
optimal sampling design, 
sample size, 
scenario analysis
spatial design, 
spatial sampling, 
trap placement, 
trap arrangement, 
trap spacing
