Modeling spatial variation in density

All SCR models considered so far assumed that animals are distributed
uniformly in space, but ecological processes such as habitat selection
and territoriality can result in non-uniform distributions of
organisms. In this chapter we present a method for fitting spatial
capture-recapture models process where the location of activity
centers is a function of spatially-referenced covariates, thus
allowing for variation of density across the state space. These models
are referred to as "inhomogeneous point process" (or IPP) models.  To
analyze SCR data using an IPP model in continuous space we provide a
custom MCMC algorithm in the accompanying R package scrbook. Discrete
space IPP models can be implemented in the BUGS language, or in the R
package secr. Moreover, we can combine IPP models with models using
ecological distance (i.e., distance as perceived by the organism under
study, for example due to habitat quality) instead of Eucledian
distance (see Chapt. 12) in the detection model and simultaneously
estimate both parameters describing the effect of habitat on density
and on animal movement from simple SCR data.  We apply the IPP model
to a camera trap data set of jaguars from Argentina, using the degree
of protection of areas within the state space as a density
covariate. Indeed, we find that jaguars occur at much higher density
in areas with higher levels of protection.  While they require more
data than simpler SCR models, IPP models are an important advance in
our ability to study the ecology of animals from SCR data.

Key words: density models, habitat selection, inhomogeneous point-process, spatial randomness, rejection sampling
 
