Unmarked Populations


All SCR models described in previous chapters address the classical
situation (of all capture-recapture studies) in which individuals in the
population can be uniquely identified when captured.  This is not
always possible using common methods of sampling.  In this chapter, we
investigate spatially explicit alternatives for estimating density of
unmarked populations. That is, when individual identity is not
possible or not available.  We develop a framework for inference in
these cases by specifying a model for observed trap-specific counts
that is conditional on an underlying SCR model.  The encounter
histories are completely latent and the observed counts are
aggregations of the latent encounter histories.  Because the model is
formulated in terms of the data we wish we had, i.e. the typical
encounter history data observed in standard capture-recapture studies
of marked animals, the model for counts is just a SCR model with a
single extension to account for the fact that the encounter history
data are unobserved.  Using the methods in this chapter, we find that
SCR models can be applied to data collected using methods like points
counts in which observers record simple counts of animals at an array
of survey locations. The model can also be fitted to camera trapping
data collected on unmarked animals, representing one of the first
formal method for estimating density from such data.  To demonstrate
the model, we begin by applying it in its most basic form to simulated
data. Then we proceed, by way of a few examples, to consider
extensions of the model in which ancillary information can be used to
increase precision.  Extensions of the method to improve precision
include obtaining informative priors based on information from the
literature, or using a subsample of marked inedividuals (covered in
detail in Chapt. 19).  The method can also be extended to include
other sampling protocols or model structures, and we provide an
application to sampling salamanders along a stream which involves a
removal type of sampling protocol. The model for the salamander data
also includes a spatially explicit submodel for temporary emigration,
allowing for movement-induced correlation in the count data from
neighboring stream segments.








