Spatial mark-resight models

Throughout most of this book we have dealt with the situation where
all individuals in the population are uniquely identifiable.  In
Chapt. 19 we introduced and developed an SCR model for
non-identifiable individuals.  These two extremes are common in the
study of animal populations with non-invasive sampling
methods. However, there is also an intermediate situation where part
of the population is tagged or otherwise marked, while some
individuals are unidentifiable.  So-called mark-resight models can be
used to estimate population size and density by combining data from
both the marked and unmarked individuals.  In mark-resight studies a
sample of individuals is captured and marked during a single marking
event. Marking is followed by resighting surveys, upon which both the
detection of marked and unmarked animals is recorded.  In this chapter
we consider mark-resight within a spatial context and develop a
spatial mark-resight (SMR) model.  We first provide some background
information on (non-spatial) mark-resight and the types of data such
surveys can provide.  The main distinctions hinge on whether or not we
know the number of marked individuals, and whether we can correctly
determine whether an individuals are marked or not.  An essential
assumption of mark-resight models is that the marked individuals are a
representative sample of the study population.  While this is also an
implicit assumption of capture-recapture models, in mark-resight
models this means that the process of marking individuals requires
careful consideration in order to produce a random sample.  This
assumption is usually addressed by employing a different method for
marking than for resighting.  In the context of SMR models, this
assumption refers not only to the \emph{demographic composition}, but
also to the \emph{spatial distribution} of the marked individuals in
the state-space ${\cal S}$.  Throughout the central part of this
chapter we will make the assumption that marked animals are a random
sample from the population in ${\cal S}$.  We explore models for both
known and unknown numbers of marked individuals, and for imperfect
individual identification of marks, and approaches to incorporate
telemetry location data.  We present 2 applications: First, we apply
the models with unknown number of marked individuals to a study of
canada geese from North Carolina. Second, we give an example involving
radio telemetry applied to a study of racoons on the outer banks.  We
conclude the chapter by presenting some general strategies for
addressing a situation where marked individuals are not a random
sample from the state-space.  Mostly we expect this is not true, and
the effect of this , and development of extensions, needs to be the
focus of future work.

Key words:
partial identification,
racoons,
random sampling,
telemetry,
unmarked individuals
